My name is Eduardo Arrino de la Rubia, and I am fortunate enough to be the moderator
for your panel this afternoon, evening, I don't know what time zone I'm in, to be honest
with you.
The goal of our panel is to provide you, the audience, our dear friends, with an understanding
of how the data science leaders who have been kind enough to share their time with us today
think about growth and change in careers, organizations, and responsibility in data
science, and we're very lucky to have them.
For just a little bit about me, I have been involved in data science since before it had
a cool name like data science, I've been fortunate enough to hire my first machine learning engineer
in the late 90s, and ever since then I've had the incredible fortune of just supporting
great teams, I'm currently a data science leader at Instagram.
And so now I will be introducing the panel to you.
Immediately to my left is Angela.
For the past 15 years, she has helped make businesses intelligently use data to make
decisions and trained others to do so.
And she likes to see the impact of her work making a difference every day.
Her thoughts on data science management have been published in the Harvard Business Review
and the Wall Street Journal, and her projects as an individual contributor have gone on
to earn accolades such as Inform's Edelman Award for Achievement in Operations Research,
and the Management Sciences and the Massachusetts Innovation and Technology Exchange Award for
Big Data and Analytics Innovations.
She finds passion in the craft and she is consistently seeking improvements and better
ways to solve tough problems.
So everybody say hello to Angela.
Next we have Hilary Parker, she is a data scientist on the styling recommendations team
at Stitch Fix.
At Stitch Fix, she focuses on what sorts of data to collect from clients in order to optimize
clothing recommendations, as well as building out prototypes of algorithms or entirely new
products based on new data sources.
You also might know her as the co-founder of the Not So Standard Deviations podcast,
which she does with Roger Peng.
It's a bi-weekly data science podcast that now has over half a million downloads.
So everybody say hello to Hilary.
Next we have Karthik.
So Karthik Ram is a research scientist at the Berkeley Institute for Data Science and
the University of California Museum of Paleontology at University of California Berkeley.
Karthik is also the co-founder of the R Open Sci Project, lead of the U.S. Research Software
Sustainability Institute, founding editor at the Journal of Open Source Software, and
has served on the boards of various organizations in this space, including Data Carpentry, Many
Labs, Libraries.io, and more.
So everybody say hello to Karthik.
And finally, way down at the end right there, we have Dr. Tracy Thiel.
Dr. Thiel is a co-founder of Data Carpentry and now the executive director of the Carpentries.
She received her PhD in computational and neural systems from the California Institute
of Technology, was an NSF postdoctoral researcher in biological informatics, then an assistant
professor in microbiology at Michigan State University.
While an associate professor, she saw a researcher's need for effective data skills to effectively
and reproducibly conduct research and co-founded Data Carpentry to scale data training along
with data production.
She's involved in the open source software, I didn't write that right, and reproducible
research communities, including as an editor at the Journal for Open Source Software and
the Journal for Open Source Education.
So everybody say hello to Dr. Tracy Thiel.
So when I agreed to do this panel, I was shocked at the breadth that I was allowed to have.
I really was not given any constraints on what to talk about.
And that's both really freeing and a little terrifying.
And I thought actually back to the previous panel that I was on at this conference, and
I remembered that we had so many questions from folks about how to grow in data science.
You know, people like I want to get into data science, I'm a junior analyst, I want to become
a data scientist, people asking about organizations, and I decided let's just do a panel entirely
on growth.
So I'm going to kick it off with my first question.
And so this is to the panel.
The career path in data science is different for all of us.
What is the most important lesson you've learned about growing as a data scientist, whether
it be your personal growth experience or how you've fostered growth in others?
Does anyone want to take it to start?
I can start.
So yeah, I mean, I think you're totally right that careers in data science, I think we finally
hired someone who had a master's in data science recently.
So out of 120 people in the data science or get stitch fix, there's one person who was
like formally trained in data science.
And so I think that some of the most important things from my perspective are being really
nimble with the tools that you're learning.
I think that keeping like being very flexible with tooling is super important, because in
the various different jobs, you're going to be tackling different problems.
And there's really no space for being a purist in terms of like, the most important thing
is being able to get a job done.
And so being a purist with your tooling and trying to get every problem into a very specific
format just isn't going to happen.
At Stitch Fix specifically, we have this philosophy of kind of a full stack data scientist, which
is like obviously has pros and cons.
But one of the big pros is that you end up having to create like scrappy solutions for
almost everything.
So like learning how to create ETL from web blogs all the way to like front end applications.
So yeah, just like kind of having like a growth mindset and being really flexible is super
important.
And then the other thing I'll say is that I actually think some of the more, I mean,
I hate this term, but kind of like the softer skills are super important.
So like, especially like cultivating empathy, I think is really important for the job and
something that we don't talk about very much.
But understanding users, understanding the people who are reading the analyses you're
putting out there, I mean, that's in some ways the most important part because you can
do a perfect data analysis, but if you're, you know, speaking a different language than
the person who's consuming it, you might as well have not done it.
And so I think that's kind of an unsung hero of successful data science work.
So yeah.
Yeah.
A question for you about that.
So I like that you were talking about not being a purist.
How do you balance then, or what advice do you give for folks balancing actually creating
breadth in the technologies they know with actually having enough depth in any one thing?
And this can be you or anyone on the panel.
Yeah.
I'm not sure I have a great, I don't know if I have a great answer to that, but I mean,
certainly I'm obviously, I mean, for people who know me, I'm like obviously really into
R.
So I think that learning one language really fluently, I know that's advice that Hadley
Wickham gives of like kind of like a depth in one language is very powerful.
And I think, I think a lot of the general concepts from one language to another translate
really well.
So I found it really effective to get a lot of depth in one language and kind of a deep
understanding of like the work I'm doing through that.
And then being willing to be flexible and work in these other languages, like, you know,
we probably all write SQL queries and we don't talk about it very much.
I'm guessing.
Yeah.
Or I know I do.
So, you know, there's a lot of concepts.
I mean, I learned SQL best by learning dplyr and then being able to translate over.
So yeah, that's my answer.
Angela, you know, I know you've managed data science teams, you've had junior data scientists.
What advice do you give to junior data scientists who want to grow in their career?
I think I have extreme respect for junior data scientists, especially because being
in the sexiest profession of the 21st century, yes, thank you for laughing, yes.
I think it made sense when, when DJ Patil wrote the article to have that articulation
of the profession.
But I think it's created a sense that it's really difficult to break into unless you
have a PhD, unless you have two PhDs, unless you have two PhDs and a body of work and three
published books and a collaboration with a Nobel laureate.
And that's not true.
I don't have a PhD.
And you stole my joke, but I've been doing data science before it had a cool name or
before I had heard of said cool name.
And so I think, and I, and I harp on this a lot.
I think being a junior data scientist is a gift.
It's a gift that you bring to any organization.
And if you feel that joining an organization is too difficult because they're giving you
a hard time because of how junior you are.
I know not everybody has this privilege, but I would make you consider strongly whether
or not you actually do want to join that organization.
Because what you bring is you bring the ability to question dogma.
Because you ideally, by virtue of your tenure in the discipline, haven't been indoctrinated
yet into the dogma.
And so you bring a breadth of ignorance.
And I say that in the best possible way.
You don't know what's supposed to be done a certain way.
You don't know what isn't allowed to be questioned anymore.
And I think that's something that can be extremely useful for, for any organization.
And so I think that's not something to hide or to shy away from.
I think the ability to be vulnerable and the ability to say I don't know are actually extremely
valuable to me as a hiring manager.
I actually have in my interviewing guide questions that are impossible to be answered.
Or at least impossible to be answered succinctly in the time allotted.
And that's because the thing that I'm testing is whether you have the humility to say I
don't know.
And whether you have the hubris to say but I can figure it out.
And that's the balance that I think is, is the balance that I would recommend younger
folks in the discipline to try to strike.
One of my favorite data science executives was pushing back that his team only wanted
to hire senior data scientists.
And he was like, you really need to stop doing that.
Junior data scientists are better.
They don't know what is impossible yet.
And I really, that strikes me.
The one thing that I'll add, I think these are all great answers.
What do y'all think about ruthless prioritization?
I think that as a junior data scientist, junior data scientists oftentimes in product teams
are sort of like the target of product managers, of engineering managers.
And they're thrashed in every which way.
Do you have any great advice that you give junior data scientists?
On how to own their communication style or ruthless prioritization?
Anyone?
No?
I'll take a stab.
Yeah, I really care about this question because I think that so frequently as data scientists
we're in these really reactive positions, especially as like a data analyst for a product
team, especially if you're probably embedded on the product team.
And I know like we talk a lot about kind of building tools to enable product managers
and all of that.
And I think that's important.
But I also think that as a data scientist, you end up thinking about the holistic product
in unique ways.
And I actually think that another way to solve that problem is to take on some of the responsibilities
that a PM might traditionally take on.
Like in many ways, I think that by thinking holistically about that system, by thinking
holistically about the product, you can really guide decision making.
And so, I mean, to your point about ruthless prioritization, I think that by taking a more
proactive like non-defensive stance about really solving problems can put you into a
place where you're really a genuine partner with a product manager rather than just kind
of like they're the person who crunches numbers for them.
And obviously, that's something like as you get more senior, that gets easier and easier
to do.
But that's one of the things I really love about my job right now is that I've built
some really good relationships with product managers where I don't feel like I'm kind
of just doing requests for them.
I really feel like I'm guiding the product development.
And if I could add to that, I think one of the really important things that a data scientist
can do, one of the biggest sources of value is the translational step, is the ability
to articulate a business problem into a quantitative answerable hypothesis and then testing that
and iterating.
And so, going back to your point about ruthless prioritization, the ability to define that
prioritization, to understand what is being asked and not perform a task but perform a
service, to understand what is the question, formulating a path to answer.
And if that path is not appropriate, having that dialogue with the product management,
with senior management, with whomever it is that is posing the business question or the
academic question and working that muscle of that translational muscle, I think that
leads to better prioritization.
And also, to be part of the dialogue of, that's fine, you have these ten follow-ups,
what doesn't get done?
Because time isn't infinite.
And bringing that context in, I think, is how I guide the more junior folks on my team
to react to that.
So, I'm going to move on to the next question, if that's all right.
So, data science organizations, whether it be a small team or a large multinational,
requires data science leaders.
It's just a thing.
How do you think about how you choose to either become a lead yourself or how leadership is
different from IC work or how we can do better to support leadership amongst our ranks?
Tracy?
Well, so, I really appreciate the question around leadership because that's definitely
one of my soapboxes, I have quite a few.
But I think that there is really, like the talk this morning, where we know things about
education and we should apply the things that we know about education when we think
about teaching people about programming.
We know things about leadership, about what makes effective leaders, that value people
and create better products, better organization, that we have an opportunity to apply in the
data science space.
But that we're not given opportunities to learn these skills, we're not necessarily
given opportunities to grow these skills.
And so, it is a real space where if we invest in thinking about leadership more strategically,
more implicitly, that we can grow better leaders in data science.
And I think so many people have the potential to be leaders that are doing it in small ways.
You don't need to lead an organization to be a leader.
If you're mentoring another person, you're a leader.
If you're working on a small team, you're a leader.
So more people seeing themselves as leaders and approaching it in a way that values the
people that they work with, I would love to see more of that and I think that investing
in that would be really transformational in the data science space.
If you could go one click more specific, what would that investment look like?
Well, my secret project is that I'm not working on, but I would love to do.
So as the Carpentries, our model is two-day workshops.
I would love there to be something like a leadership carpentry, which is kind of a two-day
thing about, I was talking to Hilary before, you know, what are the things that people
don't know coming in about project management, about how to support people, how to be a mentor,
interactive listening, facilitating a meeting, all like super exciting topics.
These are so fun.
I love all these things, but the impact of doing these things well scales so significantly
that it's just one of those things that I think if we invested in would have such broad
impacts.
So, you know, not everyone.
Everyone should be able to take a leadership carpentry.
But also just understanding, I think, an appreciation that you are a leader and invest
in and learning more about that, looking to people who you see leading in a way that you
want to lead, talking to them about that.
How did they get there?
What's their philosophy?
What do they think about being more intentional in how we approach it and think about it?
Yeah.
Karthik, what do you think about the difference between leadership and IC work?
This is like a challenge that I struggle with all the time.
So I have a very nontraditional path into being a data scientist or sort of a data science
organization leader.
And so for me, I was trained as like a traditional academic.
And so trying to manage a team and doing stuff to enable other people to produce data science
work is not something that I'm trained to do.
And so Tracy and I have all these conversations about, Jesus, I'm a terrible manager.
How can I be better at this thing?
And we have, not just me and Tracy, but a handful of others talk about, how do we be
better managers?
And so this is like a constant and ongoing struggle.
But I think Tracy makes an excellent point that a lot of people have potential to be
leaders and trying to identify people and empower them is something critical.
So I'm just figuring things out as I go.
I don't quite know what I'm really doing.
But it looks sometimes like I know what I'm doing.
But at least with some of these projects, one of the things I think about is, how do
you get more diverse people in the room?
And then you actually find people that are leaders and then you just give them more responsibility
and then they thrive.
And then you sort of recognize people and we just need to do a better job of that.
I think following on what Feline said this morning, that, wow, people know how to teach
children and we're just stumbling.
I think the same thing applies to leadership and management.
I think if we were more intentional, because it is a discipline unto itself and it is different.
And so a little anecdote, when I first became somebody who is responsible for somebody else's
ability to pay their bills, which is how I like to think about it, it's a huge responsibility.
It's a huge weight on my shoulders to make sure that the people that are actually individually
contributing are empowered, because I'm not.
My job is to multiply their contribution.
And so when I had been doing the work, I had been mentoring, I had been project managing
all of that without the label.
And the person who was my supervisor at the time said, you know, we want to make you the
official team lead.
And I went home and I cried.
And I called up my then boyfriend, my now husband, and I'm on the phone in tears saying,
I don't want to do this.
I want to be in the trenches, but it's going to be such a bad thing to bow out, to say,
no, thank you, I appreciate the vote of confidence, but no, I'm going to go back to the computer.
In hindsight, I love it.
I absolutely love it.
And so just to build on, I don't think that everybody wants to be a leader, but in my
gut, no, everybody can be.
It's not a special skill set.
It's not something that some people are gifted with genetically, the ability to do.
No, I think it is a skill that is learnable, and it's about whether or not you derive the
feeling of accomplishment from it.
And if you do great, rock it.
And if you don't, that's fine, too.
But it isn't just if you are a great individual contributor, you're naturally going to be
a great leader.
No, they're different skill sets, and they're both things that anyone with drive can learn.
And personally, now, years later, I look back, and I love what I do today even more, because
the way that I think about it is I'm programming these folks, because you can only pay somebody
to keep a seat warm.
You can't pay somebody to want to solve a problem in the best possible way.
That takes mentorship.
That takes providing ability.
That takes providing opportunities.
That takes all sorts of things that are learnable and that are incredibly empowering, because
you see the work, you see people grow, and you see people reach success because of ways
that you've cleared the midfield, and you've allowed them to run their play.
Oh, I would just love to add, I mean, I totally agree with everyone's talking, and I think
we are in a field that kind of lionizes IC work and makes it, I think that, yeah, we
sort of self-deprecate about management, where it's like, oh, I used to be an IC worker,
and now I just, like, answer emails or schedule meetings, and I think that's, like, it's reflective
of the fact that I think a lot of people, myself included, in this field, you're sort
of, you likely came from a place where, like, your kind of personal intelligence, personal
productivity was, like, you know, your self-worth, and I think that it actually takes a tremendous
amount of personal work to kind of break free of that and feel like, you know, there's more
to my value than, like, being the smartest person in a meeting, and there's more to success
in this job than being, like, you know, the most productive coder, and so I think, I think
in some other fields, that is, like, more of an understanding than in technical roles,
and so I think that, like, investing in kind of your personal identity work, for lack of
a better term, and, like, kind of feeling settled inside helps to kind of understand,
like, these multidimensional facets of being an effective leader, and so, again, I feel
like that was kind of a personal journey for me, going from kind of an academic setting,
where, like, there's kind of one thing, and it's being smart, into, like, this role where,
like, partnership's so important, leadership, like, just, it's just, like, a more complete,
I don't know, intersection with the world.
I'm kind of, I'm ecstatic that you talked about that. Whenever I talk to folks about
transitioning from IC work to management work, maybe not be the first question, but in the
top three questions is, well, but my skills are going to atrophy, like, that is sort of,
like, the fear. The fear is that your skills are going to atrophy, and it's, we not, we
don't do a great job of understanding that, hey, first and foremost, last time I checked,
like, loops are still loops, right? Like, that hasn't changed much, unless y'all know
something I don't, but no, that actually, like, this gives you this opportunity to develop
these incredibly rich skills. Have y'all ever encountered that, where people, like, are,
like, oh, I don't want to take on this responsibility because I'm going to lose
something, and have you ever, like, have you provided any feedback to them about what you
thought about that? I'll take a stab at this. So, I felt this way all the time. I still
feel that way sometimes, and so, adding to what Hilary said earlier, part of transitioning to
being in a more of a leadership role is trying to redefine what success means. So, for me,
success is not being the smartest person in the room, or trying to be, like, the best coder,
trying to write, like, the most compact, like, bit of code possible. I think of it as, like,
Angela does, like, having been in this role for quite some time, is how can I enable people to
do their best work, and how can I give them the resources to do it? So, that's sort of been, like,
a slow transition, but it's, like, okay to be at peace with it after some time. Yeah.
And I think it's okay to not want to be a manager. You can lead. You can speak at conferences,
and find the tone of the conversation, and help spearhead the evolution of the discipline without
having people whose time cards you approve. That's fine. There's the evolution of individual
contribution is not management, but I don't think there's anything that should stop anybody who
wants to pursue it, who has the opportunity to do so. A door opens, or a window opens,
but I think if you have any hesitation, it's worthwhile to explore that. It's worthwhile
to explore whether that hesitation is coming from a place of insecurity, and fear, and imposter
syndrome. It's okay to wonder if you're going for the management role, because in some circles,
it has more prestige. If you're fearing, if you're cowing away from it, because in our circles, it has
perhaps less of a prestige, because our identities are so tied to the product of our code.
So, I think all of those are valid. I don't think there's any wrong way to explore this,
as long as you have the knowledge that it's perfectly doable, and it's perfectly valid to
not want to do it either. I love that. So, I'm going to move on to the next question, if that's
all right. So, we've talked about ICs. We've talked about the transition of ICs to leadership.
Let's talk about organizations for a second. Data science organizations grow and change.
In the organization that you've seen grow and change, in an organization you've seen grow and
change, what is the most important lesson you've learned about what to do, and what is the most
important thing that you've learned that you should absolutely not do? I'll kick off. The big
one that I've learned is you don't hire data scientists if you don't have data. It sounds
goofy, but there are so many times that I've seen people hire data scientists. They're like, oh,
and we'll build a system, and we'll collect data, and then you'll get to do stuff with it.
Yeah. Carly? Tracy? What are things you've learned to do or not to do in growing organizations?
Yeah. So, we're not a data science organization. We have data, though.
Yeah. I think that's a really interesting question, and I think it also depends
a little bit on the organization. I mean, for us personally as a non-profit, we went from
one person to a couple organizations and mergers, and now we're a team of about 10.
And so, I think one of the things maybe not to do slash to do is to think about where you want to be
when you're setting up your structures. I think some of the decisions made early on are
lock you into certain things because they don't envision where you're going. And it's really hard
to envision that future sometimes at the beginning, but I guess what I say sort of all the time, and
my team laughs at me, is let's take a step back. Forging ahead on this thing, okay, let's take a
step back. Where is it that we want to go? How can we not overbuild it, but give ourselves when
we're creating this thing the flexibility for it to be something bigger for it to scale?
And I think the point is that you'll get it wrong a lot, but only by getting it wrong do you kind
of learn what to do next time. Anyone else? Yeah. I mean, I think one thing that I've seen
in the organizations I've been a part of is the importance of adapting as a business grows.
And so, I think that a couple years ago, I was really into blameless postmortems, and I was,
you know, reading a lot about them and talking about them. And I think that what I really like
about them is that it sets up this paradigm for very explicit kind of ROI discussions. I mean,
I think, you know, this is something that obviously managers and leaders think about all
the time, but I think that there's some really important decisions in data work, especially
about, you know, like, for example, being the full stack data scientist is very appropriate
for an early stage startup where you need to build scrappy solutions quickly, and, you know,
you want to be able to function independently. But as you become a more mature organization,
like, that model sort of becomes less and less feasible. You have, like, more of a higher
standard for the algorithms you put out, as well as the, you know, front-end experience for the
clients or the back-end experience. You know, you consider technical debt in a different way.
And so, I think just, like, having very explicit regroups about, like, okay, here was the tradeoff
we made for, like, nimbleness versus kind of future-proofing, and, you know, five years later,
what does that look like? I think that that's something it's, there's this great paper about
how machine learning is the high-interest credit card of technical debt. I think that's absolutely
true. And so, and the paper goes and, like, explains exactly why, but in general, machine
learning systems are very complex. There's a lot of hidden assumptions in them, and the technical
debt can scale really fast and in invisible ways. And so, I think, yeah, just, like, having these
explicit check-ins about what's appropriate for our org right now is super important.
Anyone else? Can I say something? Yeah. I think two other things, now that I think about it,
is one is investing in systems that allow your team to work effectively together,
and that's, like, physical systems, maybe that's project management or communication strategies,
but also around the values that you share as a team and having a shared sense of what that means,
and so not just what communication channel you're going to use, but how are you going to communicate
with each other. And that shared sense makes, I think, all the work a little bit easier and,
again, is kind of that thing that helps set the stage for scaling. I think, like Hilary was saying,
knowing when to do that is always a little challenging, but it's usually sooner than you
think you should, because when you wait, it gets a lot harder. So, it's that point where you, like,
feel the pain, but not totally catastrophic yet, but even if it's totally catastrophic,
you still can do it. So, don't hire data scientists without data. I'm actually going to add
another one that I'm curious what you all think. I think a big mistake I've seen in organizations
is over-hiring. What I've seen is, basically, data scientists will get hired and there isn't a
clear success criteria, there isn't a clear thing for them to do, and they're just sort of, like,
brought into the organization and told, figure stuff out. Have you ever experienced that? And
how do you, you know, how do you think about that problem and combating it in the organizations
you're in right now? Yeah, no comment on if I've experienced it before, but I think one thing
that's really challenging and exciting about this field is that, in general, like, the product
management of machine learning systems is a new thing. I mean, I imagine, I think Facebook has
some really excellent kind of technical machine learning PMs, but I think you're kind of not
alone, but there's not many folks doing this well. And so, especially with kind of smaller orgs, I
think that the data science can be a black box, you know, I think that's kind of a common thread,
and so having a mature understanding of machine learning within product management can be very
difficult. And again, kind of this thing I was alluding to earlier about leadership, I think
that data scientists can be really uniquely positioned to guide machine learning product
development, and because they understand the problem in a unique way that probably most people
in the org don't understand it. And so, I think that, yes, I have seen teams kind of just pop up,
and it's like, hey, have fun, and they'll throw a junior PM on the project, and I think that's the
wrong thing. I actually think you need a pretty senior technical PM, or you need people, data
scientists who are acting, like, taking on some of the responsibilities of product development,
and thinking really creatively about, like, what can we realistically solve. So, yeah, that's one
of the ways that I've seen, like, a failure, and kind of where I think the solution lies.
All right, if it's okay with everyone, I'll move on to the fourth question.
Yeah.
All right. So, again, we've talked about ICs, we've talked about becoming leaders,
we've talked about organizations, and all of these around growth, and now I'm going to talk
about responsibilities, right? Our responsibilities as data scientists are significant. As we've seen,
the ways that data can be used or misused, and I've personally felt the weight of the responsibility
as a data professional, grow. I think that when I hired my first ML engineer in 1999,
I don't think that I had a great understanding of the responsibilities that this new world would
create. When you look forward, what are the principles by which you hope to shape the policies
and practices of data science to assure that your work is responsible? Angela?
I'll tie the answer to this question with an addendum to the last one, which is, one of the
things that I have learned not to do is, when you have established that you have a need, you have
established what the success criterion is, or the criteria are, and you're out and you're recruiting,
and you're attracting talent, and you have a team, perhaps, at your organization for talent
acquisition, and they've brought in several resumes, and now I have my resumes, and I'm
looking at them. The one thing that I would say you shouldn't do is you should not hire the best
of the people you have at hand, or the best of the people that you've interviewed. I think one of
the things that we have a little bit is that you interview somebody, they're extremely smart,
they're personable, and whatever, they would just be a bad fit. That's not a negative. That's not
something that is a personal failure of them. It's just not a good fit, and so I think going forward,
part of that is having a better group of people to choose from. Better not in the
personal qualities, but better as in how they fit, what your goals are, and what the organization
is going to be, and so that's the answer to the last question. Don't do that, and how it fits to
this is going forward. I would love to have organizations metabolize the fact that it is
so important to have people working at your organization, people teaching at your academy,
who are representative of the world, because one of the things that we learn in data science,
and one of the things that I'm adamant about, is that data isn't, and Hillary and I have had
lots of conversations about this, data alone isn't ground truth. Data are artifacts of systems. They're
breadcrumbs. There's this amazing book, which I'm going to butcher. I think it's All Tomorrows,
but I'll tweet about it. It is, in essence, paleo artists imagining what animals could look like,
so I don't know if anybody has ever imagined a T-Rex without the teeth glaring, right? Like,
every representation that we see has that, and so these folks who are trained as paleo artists,
who are trained to imagine what flesh and cartilage look like on these extant bones,
they reimagine what a manatee looks like, and it's landfaring, or they imagine what
a swan looks like, and it doesn't have a neck the way that we know they do, because these bones
aren't truth. They're artifacts that we have access to, but they don't tell the whole story,
and for you to be able to ask better questions, for you to be able to imagine different futures,
for you to be able to allow for the fact that that data might be only a partial truth,
you need people in your organization who have experienced that and who know to question that,
and who know to question that things aren't what you expect them to be. They are what they are,
and our job is to try to build inference models and to try to understand what that data is telling
us, but I think it's a problem when we use the data as the metric rather than as the channel for
what it is that we're trying to do, so how I hope that informs the theory and the praxis of the
discipline is for us to be mindful of the fact that we need lots of perspectives to ask lots of
different questions so that we get a more well-rounded understanding of what data is telling us.
That's fantastic. I mean, I'll jump in on that because I actually share an office,
or one of my offices I share with an actual T-Rex.
Like back in the day, someone, I don't remember who this was off the top of my head, but
assembled like a stegosaurus skeleton as like a unicorn because they didn't have a mental model
of what it looked like, but the real point is like having good data science teams means having
very diverse data science teams, people that bring a lot of different ideas together and also
thinking a lot about how to make your work just broadly reproducible and effective and owning
your mistakes because we all make mistakes and owning issues that happen with data and then
going back and talking about things like blameless postmortems. These are all things that are
valuable, and so last year a handful of us got together and started writing down what we think
are ethical guidelines to be a good data scientist, so we captured all this in a manifesto. I think
it's datasciencemanifesto.org. I can't quite remember, but I'll tweet it out, but I try to
think about all these things every time. I try to assemble a team for a project, and like Angela
says, you don't just grab the best person out of like a list of CVs and just say like you.
You think more about the team more holistically.
Tracy? Yeah, I would echo what Karthik said, and we saw that question. I said, Karthik,
what's the manifesto that you wrote? Because I think it is having something to kind of tie
back every decision that you make, so you're faced every day with decisions that
affect people, right? I think that is one of the great things and the terrifying things at the same
time. What's your process like when you make that decision? What's your foundation? So something
like this manifesto or your personal values or your company's values, how do you think about
those things and everything that you do? I think it is interesting as I give talks,
especially in a public setting, the question we get most often is around the data ethics,
and almost no one on the panel or anyone speaking has anything to say about it.
So thinking about what we would say and being more intentional in communicating that
to the people who use the products or the community at large and engaging them, being
open to engaging them in that conversation as well. Yeah, I think all very excellent points.
I'll add that there's Cathy O'Neill wrote a book called Weapons of Math Destruction,
and I think that one of the key takeaways she has is that we should have kind of a data science
version of a Hippocratic Oath, which is the oath that doctors take, and I think that's a great idea.
I mean, establishing kind of a community-wide standard of the values that we have, I think,
is important. Obviously, it doesn't prevent like, you know, not every doctor is necessarily ethical,
but I think it's a step in the right direction. And then the other quick thing I'll add is that
frequently as data scientists, kind of to all the points about like diversity and having people
bring things up, I think that frequently, again, with the black box machine learning thing,
a lot of times, you can't rely on other parts of the organization necessarily
understanding the issues. So, taking that responsibility to surface things and explain
the implications, and yeah, taking ownership of that, I think is really important for data scientists.
Yeah, I'm just going to, that ownership is critical. Product isn't going to do it.
Product is trying to shape the future, right? Engineering is trying to build it, you know.
At the end of the day, we are the ones who have this responsibility, and I would love to see a
world in which chief data officers, in which all the way from chief data officers to the
entry-level data scientists, was keenly aware that this was them. They were the bar.
They were where the buck stops, and I really hope that we're able to continue that.
So, we're almost running out of time. I think it's time for us to take some questions from
the audience. Hopefully, are the flying mics going to be deployed? What's the,
I don't know what the plan is exactly. It's a great bad name. The flying mics.
So, are there any questions in the audience? Yeah, I have lights, so I'm trusting that other folks
are going to see people and hand mics off. All right, over there. Hi, I'm curious what is the
most effective way you've seen product management and data science work together and actually
accomplish things? Because there always seems to be a hierarchical shift depending on the project,
and I don't necessarily know how it fits, especially with your experience.
Does anyone want to take? I mean, I've got a take, but if y'all have a take, I'd prefer to hear it.
I mean, I'm very lucky right now in that data science is one of our key competitive advantages
as Stitch Fix. So, you know, there's obviously other personal styling services out there. So,
it's kind of like a freebie for me because I'm like, oh yeah, just be a great partner and like
come up with ideas. But I think, I mean, I'm just sort of repeating myself, but I think
not assuming that your place is just to crunch numbers and like thinking much more broadly and
systematically about the problems that you can solve. I think that, I mean, product managers
want to put good products out there. And so, if you work on solving that problem, then I think
that they will respond to that or at least that's been my experience. And so, just like coming to
the table, assuming, again, this takes confidence, it takes personal development, but kind of
assuming that you're a partner, not someone who's receiving tasks, I think that that can go a long
way. And then obviously, like actually partnering and helping bring something to life.
I think that's right. One thing that I'll add very tactically is whatever your planning cycle is,
product has a roadmap. Make sure data science also has a roadmap. Make sure that that roadmap is
correlated and complementary to the product roadmap, but not directly tied to it. And then
make product see the value in that roadmap. Because that allows you to then have very,
very real talks when product comes down and asks hard questions about the tradeoffs that
are going to be required. I think that we as data science organizations oftentimes don't do that,
and I think it's a critical thing to do. Yeah. Totally agree.
All right. Next question. Hi. We've talked about this a little bit, but I just want to make it
explicit. What are common ways that data scientists fail? And if you want to answer it in another
direction, in your own careers, if you've seen data scientists fired or volunteered to leave a
team or a company, what happened to them? Why did that happen to them? And I don't mean this in a
morbid way. I just believe that a lot of times we learn about what works by learning about how
things break. I'm going to answer first, but I want... I've seen data scientists fail by not
saying no enough, committing to too many things, being unable to provide anything other than a
cursory analysis, and then not having a competitive value over a replacement level sort of like
Excel spreadsheet. That, to me, is the big one. I'll add to that. Ways that I have seen data
scientists fail is by assuming that the product manager knows enough to ask the question in the
best way, not being collaborative and a partner in helping refine the question so that the ultimate
product is the best version that it could be. And sometimes that means it's a 180 from what was
originally imagined. I think product managers are very smart and they're very good at product
management. They're not necessarily really good at understanding what's possible by sciencing on
data. And that's where you come in as a data scientist, to step in and to say no or to say
yes and what if. I think having those conversations are part and parcel of what
you get paid to do. And you're not just somebody in charge with delivering an output. You're
somebody in charge with the success of a project, of a product, of an organization. So that's the
number one way that I have seen failure. And to answer your question, what has happened to that,
so in a previous life I was leading a team for an organization that was not data scientific
at its core, but they were expanding into data science. And the market took a turn and difficult
decisions had to be made and the entire data science team got laid off. My boss, me, the people
that worked for me, all the way down that whole branch just got chopped and the company sort of
tightened in and focused on what had been their bread and butter. And this is one thing about this
community that is remarkable. Within six months everybody had a fantastic job. Not a backup job,
not a I got to do anything out of desperation because I got bills, but really great jobs that
were sourced through the community because they knew people who knew of opportunities and
who knew of good opportunities. And so I think that's part of why we're all here. It's to learn
how to use our studio and to become kick-ass at it, but to make connections and to elevate the field.
I'll add that one way that I've seen failure in data science is like caring more about the
statistical method or the fancy model, caring more about that than about like solving a problem for
the business. So I've seen a lot of people building some sort of fancy machine learning thing that
essentially was like a cool intellectual project, but wasn't actually the person wasn't really tied
in or thinking about what the product needed and like what what the customers of the product
needed, what the what the fundamental problem was that you were solving. And I think that's
something that is the impulse within the community. We like to get together and talk about fancy
algorithms and fancy you know data sources and whatever, but usually like many data science
problems can be solved with a pretty simple model. And so kind of like letting go of the
ego around that and really thinking instead about like you'll you will have more impact if you think
a lot more about the product that you're working on and a lot less about like kind of these marginal
gains by using slightly different algorithms. All right, we have time. I guess this is a stupid
thing because there's a comment rather than a question. I apologize. We only do questions.
No, no, no. Well, let me paraphrase something then. There's a really famous quote about politicians
that anyone who grows up really, really, really, really wanting to be a politician should never
be allowed to be one. And I think it's the same for managers. So Angela, you're okay,
because if you don't want to be a manager, that's probably fine. You're in a good position.
But, you know, I think there's also the Peter principle. People grow,
you know, the incompetent people grow into management positions.
Unless this ends with a question, we're going to have a ruckus on our hands.
I'd best sit down then. Okay.
Hey, thanks. On the topic of soft skills, how do you manage your mental health or what advice do
you have to manage mental health? Sorry, can you repeat that?
Mental health. How do you manage your mental health?
Well, any advice?
I have my advice. I have dogs I love, an incredible wife that supports me,
and every Saturday I rent a room with a jacuzzi and a sauna for 90 minutes and I just hang out.
Nice.
I'll just say, this is a great question, and burnout is a huge problem with every single
person that I know. So just being aware of burnout and doing things like Eduardo does,
I meditate, I do all kinds of things like him, just to like stay on the edge of burnout or
push myself back from burnout. But one thing you can do as a manager is actually be aware of this.
If you've already experienced this, I can spot this in people pretty easily. So then I try to
enable them to like step back and then refocus and things like that.
And sometimes you're in an organization that isn't as respectful of people's mental health
because of the culture and everything. And if you find yourself in that role and it's incumbent upon
you to change that, you can make a monetary argument. You can say that if people burn out,
they're going to leave and the cost to replace them is too much. You can say that them being
burned out means they're making suboptimal decisions or they're making bad decisions
and they're harming the product. I mean, there are ways to articulate this so that you can do
your job of watching out for the people on your team to make sure that they don't have to raise
their hand once they're past their point of no return. I think I said it in my talk earlier,
if folks have not read this, Chaos Monkeys, the story of how Netflix has their systems
architected so that certain systems will go offline on purpose and randomly to ensure that
there's resilience built in. Maternity leave, vacation, holidays are people chaos monkeys.
And you have to ensure that your team can survive if somebody has an emergency, if somebody
gets a scheduled vacation that they're going to go anyway and then something
poops out. I mean, those are important things to build resiliency on the team and there is a
business rationale for them. So if you think that you working yourself to death is in the benefit
of the business, you've got it backwards. And I have no stomach for anybody who brings themselves
to the point of burnout because they think that's what's expected of them in my team. It's not.
And we just had year-end books closing and I went through and I saw everybody who hadn't taken
their vacation and I went and I talked to every single one of them. I was like, why? And what's
going on? And so when is your next vacation? And when's that happening? And you're going to turn
your phone off. You're going to take the SIM card out. I don't want you available because otherwise
other people don't know to learn, to work around that absence, that planned absence,
which is an incredibly important business skill to develop.
I would love to add like kind of in this like financial, you know, there's a reason. I mean,
I have no doubt in my mind whatsoever that the thing that has helped my career the most is
investing in my own kind of personal emotional development. I think, you know, like jobs are
deeply personal and you end up exploring these parts of yourself and your personality and your
insecurities and it's a unique lens that you see yourself through. And so, yeah, I, you know,
invest in my mental health. I live at a Zen center, so it's helpful, but, you know, meditating
and just like generally being interested in the human aspect of our job, I think is, again, like
just if you want to be a better data scientist, this has been the thing that was most important
to me. I just want to quickly add, though, I think that there is an element of self-care that's
more about shaming you into self-care. So then you feel badly that you haven't been taking care
of yourself, which is like not the great cycle. So being kind to yourself that maybe you haven't
been taking care of yourself, you're not doing the seven things in the magazine that they say
you should do, like that's okay too. Don't beat yourself up for not taking care of yourself. But
yeah, it's a journey. You figure it out over time and I think you grow into a role what
you can handle next year is not necessarily what you can handle right now.
All right. Well, I was going to say, if you have anything you want to pitch or if you have
anything you want to say, we can go around. If not, do you have? I'm hiring.
If you are interested in data engineering, in data science, if you're a junior, if you're a senior,
if you want to look at robot logs, if you don't want to look at robot logs,
if you want to be a data steward, we have this awesome role that used to be called data hygienist
and now is called data steward. And the sole purpose of this person is to look at provenance
and governance and ensure that everybody who needs data has it and knows where to go. And if
they don't, how do we fix that? There's tons of really cool jobs. So come find me.
Well, I guess I'll say Stitch Fix is hiring too.
We're hiring. It's a great place to work. And then I'll also just pitch my podcast.
I have a podcast called Not So Standard Deviations. And we talk a lot about kind
of like the why of data scientists, the how of data science. So yeah, I would love to connect
with listeners and love to have you as a listener. I'll just add that if you're interested in talking
about challenges around leadership or running open source teams or open source projects or
data science teams, or how to transition from academia to data science, feel free to email me
or talk to me. I like that one. Yeah. I think that there are actually groups around those
discussions is important. I think a lot of the things that we talked about here, talking about
them and knowing that they're things is valuable. I guess if I was, we're not hiring, I wish we were.
The nonprofit status makes our hiring rates a little lower. But if I'm going to, I'll pitch,
if you want to support the idea of a leadership carpentry, send me an email.
All right. Well, everybody, thank you very much for your time. And thanks to our panelists.